Okay, it's 210, so let's get started.
NOTE CONF
My name is Phil Wadler.
I actually created this version of infant a many years
NOTE CONF
ago, but Don has been teaching it recently.
But I've, uh.
NOTE CONF
I requested to teach a few lectures to you, and
Don graciously agreed to.
NOTE CONF
I'll be giving you lectures today, tomorrow, and a week
from today.
NOTE CONF
Next Monday.
And just to check tomorrow's lectures in the same room
NOTE CONF
as this one.
That is so amazing.
NOTE CONF
Back when I created this class, timetabling treated it as
horribly.
NOTE CONF
And we met at a different day, every a different
time, every day of the week, and a different room
NOTE CONF
every day of the week.
So this is great.
NOTE CONF
I'm so pleased.
So to get started, as usual, are there any questions?
NOTE CONF
So has Don taught you guys how important it is
to ask questions?
NOTE CONF
Yes.
Yes, yes.
NOTE CONF
Good.
Do you want to demonstrate that by asking one?
NOTE CONF
Right.
I'll tell you my story about asking questions.
NOTE CONF
I don't know what story Don uses, but I used
to be a postgraduate at Oxford University, and while I
NOTE CONF
was there, they interviewed for a lectureship position.
I was too junior to even be considered.
NOTE CONF
Uh, but they did something unusual, so it's quite usual.
You have all your candidates in.
NOTE CONF
Each candidate gives a talk.
What was unusual is they had them all in on
NOTE CONF
the same day, and the candidates sat in on the
talks by the other candidates.
NOTE CONF
This is very unusual.
So there was one person who, um.
NOTE CONF
Asked to talk at every single lecture, and that turned
out to be Richard Byrd.
NOTE CONF
And then he turned out to get the lectureship position,
and he and I became colleagues.
NOTE CONF
And in fact, we wrote a textbook on Haskell that's
sort of the predecessor to the textbook for this course.
NOTE CONF
So how many people here have been through the Scottish
education system?
NOTE CONF
I have not, as you can tell by my accent,
a fair number of you.
NOTE CONF
So the impression I sometimes get of the Scottish education
system is that they teach you not to ask questions.
NOTE CONF
They teach you that if you ask a question, I
see people nodding there.
NOTE CONF
They teach you that if you ask a question that
you're saying that you don't know and therefore you're admitting
NOTE CONF
to ignorance, and so asking a question is a bad
idea.
NOTE CONF
Has anybody in the Scottish education system or elsewhere ever
received a message of that kind?
NOTE CONF
Several of you are nodding your heads or Raising your
hands.
NOTE CONF
So the reason I tell this story about Richard Byrd
is to make the point.
NOTE CONF
It's the exact opposite.
If you ask a question, you show that you are
NOTE CONF
involved, that you are interested.
And guess what?
NOTE CONF
There is no single person in the whole world who
knows everything.
NOTE CONF
So if you are asking a question, it is not
like you're showing that you're ignorant.
NOTE CONF
On the other hand, I don't know about you, but
sometimes I feel a bit nervous about asking a question.
NOTE CONF
I feel a little bit like everybody else in the
audience must know the answer to this.
NOTE CONF
I'm the only one who doesn't.
So fortunately, I'm an old fart now, and so I
NOTE CONF
trust myself a little bit more, and I'm more likely
to just go off and ask questions.
NOTE CONF
But when I was closer to your age and I
was nervous, um, if I wasn't sure if it was
NOTE CONF
safe to ask a question, what I would do is
I would turn to the person next to me.
NOTE CONF
I'd whisper in their ear.
I'd say, the lecture is talking about monads.
NOTE CONF
I've never heard of monads.
Should I know what a monad is?
NOTE CONF
And then either the guy will say, yes, of course,
everybody knows what monads are, but this is very rare.
NOTE CONF
What would happen?
Way more often.
NOTE CONF
It's the guy who goes, no, I don't know what
monads are either.
NOTE CONF
And then I would know it was safe to ask
a question.
NOTE CONF
So if you have a question, please ask, because that's
the way learning happens, right?
NOTE CONF
Learning happens when you get stuck, when there's something you
don't know, and then you have to get yourself unstuck.
NOTE CONF
And there are many ways of doing that.
But one of them's by asking a question and I
NOTE CONF
see a hand raised.
What does IO stand enjoy.
NOTE CONF
What does IO stand for?
IO stands for input output and we'll get.
NOTE CONF
We'll say more about that in a minute.
But I was actually a fairly standard term in computing.
NOTE CONF
But and now you know it.
Um, oh, and this is another reason why it's very
NOTE CONF
important to ask questions, because my job is to communicate
with you.
NOTE CONF
Um, but you have a problem.
Your problem is I know too much.
NOTE CONF
Um, so I might think that something is completely obvious
where it's not obvious to you.
NOTE CONF
And in fact, the word io is an example of
that.
NOTE CONF
I'm just so used to it, I forget that there
are people who don't know what this means yet.
NOTE CONF
So by all means, if I say something you don't
understand.
NOTE CONF
Please ask, and I can't.
I can sort of see the people over there if
NOTE CONF
I if I lean over.
You guys want them all moved somewhere else.
NOTE CONF
There's plenty of other room in the room.
I like to see people's faces.
NOTE CONF
You're all clustered in the corner where I can't see
you.
NOTE CONF
Is this deliberate?
This is what we said.
NOTE CONF
It's just what you said.
Can I get you to sit somewhere else today?
NOTE CONF
Because I'm going to sit down for this.
Well, just move a bit, all of you.
NOTE CONF
That's cool.
Thank you.
NOTE CONF
All right, so I should explain why I'm sitting.
I had my, um.
NOTE CONF
Right hip replaced at the beginning of term so I
can walk much better now.
NOTE CONF
I occasionally forget my stick, but I'm still walking with
a stick, so that's why I am going to sit
NOTE CONF
down during the class.
But it's also very important that you know about the
NOTE CONF
stick, because you know that I am armed, so be
polite to me.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Thank you for moving.
NOTE CONF
That's great.
Now I can see everybody.
NOTE CONF
Uh, before we get started, are there any other questions?
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So I'm going to talk a little bit about one
of the features of Haskell monads.
NOTE CONF
It's actually right.
How many people are familiar with the Haskell logo?
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
You've all seen the Haskell logo.
NOTE CONF
So what are the two elements in the Haskell logo?
So this big thing in the centre, you all know
NOTE CONF
what that is by now a lambda, right.
Which stands for making a function.
NOTE CONF
And what's the other thing there.
Can you see that?
NOTE CONF
There's something else there.
There's a greater than greater than equal sign.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So the second grader then.
NOTE CONF
Right.
This is part of the lambda and part of a
NOTE CONF
greater than.
So it's a greater than greater than equal.
NOTE CONF
Uh and does anybody know why that's there.
You will by the end of today.
NOTE CONF
It's a symbol of a monad, right.
It's a it's one of the symbols used with monads.
NOTE CONF
That's right.
So I'm going to start with some philosophy.
NOTE CONF
I'm going to tell you about the Mind-Body problem.
So I'm back in the, well, back through history.
NOTE CONF
But the particular time we're going to talk about is
the Middle Ages.
NOTE CONF
Um, there was a concern, right?
Because you have thoughts and your body does stuff.
NOTE CONF
And they were wondering what is the connection between these
two?
NOTE CONF
And they'd begun to work out that maybe the brain
has something to do with thoughts.
NOTE CONF
And then the body does stuff.
So they thought there had to be a connection between
NOTE CONF
I'm saying mind.
But actually back then they were worried about the soul.
NOTE CONF
There has to be a connection between the soul and
the body.
NOTE CONF
And so how many people have heard of Descartes, the
guy who says, I think, therefore I am?
NOTE CONF
So he was a philosopher in the middle Ages.
He also came up with Cartesian coordinates, which are very
NOTE CONF
important to us.
Now I'm just giving x, y coordinates for things, right?
NOTE CONF
It seems completely obvious, but somebody had to invent it.
And that was Descartes.
NOTE CONF
And so there's a picture of Descartes, and there's a
picture illustrating the mind body problem.
NOTE CONF
And he figured he knew the answer.
The answer is that the soul connects to the body
NOTE CONF
through the pineal gland.
And why did he think it was the pineal gland?
NOTE CONF
Well, because you don't see double.
Of course you do if you get drunk.
NOTE CONF
But he said, well, you don't see double and everything
else is duplicated, but there's only one pineal gland, so
NOTE CONF
that must be the place where it connects.
So we're still very interested in things like minds and
NOTE CONF
bodies and how they relate to each other.
We no longer believe that the pineal gland is the
NOTE CONF
connection point.
But he thought there was just that, this one connection
NOTE CONF
point.
So we will come back to that.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So you all know Haskell by now?
NOTE CONF
Yep.
Okay, good.
NOTE CONF
Um, so that's great.
But many of you have learned other programming languages and
NOTE CONF
other programming languages.
You can give commands like print.
NOTE CONF
And then the program will do something.
Whereas in Haskell all we do is we compute values.
NOTE CONF
So now I'm going to give you a way of
talking about doing things.
NOTE CONF
And we're going to fit that in to the way
Haskell looks at the world.
NOTE CONF
And the way Haskell looks at the world is everything
is a value.
NOTE CONF
So we're going to have a value that means do
something.
NOTE CONF
And those are going to be called well we're going
to start with commands.
NOTE CONF
And then we will generalised to so command does something
but often right.
NOTE CONF
We're still interested in values.
So we're also going to have a notion of a
NOTE CONF
command that also returns a value.
But let's just start with commands.
NOTE CONF
So here's a command put char.
So that takes a character and returns a command.
NOTE CONF
And commands are gonna have the funny name io.
So this is io applied to the unit type.
NOTE CONF
And io and I wouldn't bother to explain this because
I would forget.
NOTE CONF
But IO stands for input output.
And here's an example of output.
NOTE CONF
If you say put char, then that's the command that,
if it is ever performed, will print an exclamation mark.
NOTE CONF
And we also have a way to combine two commands.
So this is written greater than greater than.
NOTE CONF
And this takes a command whoops and a command.
And it returns a command so.
NOTE CONF
Put char of question mark followed by put char of
exclamation mark is the command that, if it is ever
NOTE CONF
performed, prints a question mark followed by an x and
exclamation mark, also sometimes pronounced pling.
NOTE CONF
And then we've got the command done, which is again
a command.
NOTE CONF
It's an IO that returns the unit type, and the
term done denotes the command that, if it is ever
NOTE CONF
performed, does nothing.
And notice that this is different from doing nothing right.
NOTE CONF
If you think about thinking about doing nothing and doing
nothing.
NOTE CONF
Those are not quite the same thing, are they?
Okay, so this is the command that if you did,
NOTE CONF
it would do nothing.
So now we can write a command to print a
NOTE CONF
string.
So string is just a list of characters.
NOTE CONF
So we're going to call this put string.
And it takes a string and it returns a command
NOTE CONF
again.
So put string of the empty list.
NOTE CONF
How would you print the empty list?
By doing nothing.
NOTE CONF
So we return.
Done.
NOTE CONF
If we have a string whose name of a list
whose head is X and whose tail is xz, then
NOTE CONF
we can put char of x followed by putting string
of x's.
NOTE CONF
So now if we say put string.
Question mark.
NOTE CONF
Exclamation mark.
That would be equivalent to put char question mark, put
NOTE CONF
char exclamation mark and then done.
And both of these are the command that if it
NOTE CONF
is ever performed, prints a question mark followed by an
exclamation mark.
NOTE CONF
Any questions?
Yes.
NOTE CONF
Why do you keep saying if it is ever performed?
Because it doesn't do it.
NOTE CONF
It just stands for something that you can do.
But we don't do it.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And more compactly.
NOTE CONF
Right.
We could define put string as follows.
NOTE CONF
Right.
It would just be folder with the two greater than
NOTE CONF
signs and done.
So this is what you do with the empty list.
NOTE CONF
This is how you combine.
And A had an a tail of a list.
NOTE CONF
And then we would compose that with mapping put char.
So you're given a list of characters.
NOTE CONF
You replace each character by the command that if it
was ever done, would print that character.
NOTE CONF
And then you combine those all into one big character.
That should be clear enough.
NOTE CONF
Is that familiar to people?
By now.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And right then the this operator has some properties, right?
NOTE CONF
It's, um, a right identity.
It's a left identity and it's associative.
NOTE CONF
So it doesn't matter where you put the parentheses.
And again, these should be familiar.
NOTE CONF
I see at least one person nodding their head.
Two people.
NOTE CONF
Three people.
Very good.
NOTE CONF
I see one person wearing 3D goggles.
Does that mean you're watching a movie like in the
NOTE CONF
meta ads?
No.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so by now, right, somebody already asked us, wait
a minute, what does this mean?
NOTE CONF
If it's ever performed, how do I actually do something?
So the way we're going to do things is by
NOTE CONF
saying, I've got a special command called main, and whatever
a main must be defined to be a command, An
NOTE CONF
IO of unit and whatever main says to do, we
do.
NOTE CONF
So here it says, okay, run the command.
Confused.
NOTE CONF
It's just this module that defines um, put string of
that and let's just try this.
NOTE CONF
This should run.
So.
NOTE CONF
So this is defined just this way.
So I don't need to define put string in this
NOTE CONF
program because that's part of the standard prelude.
The same thing that defines plus and so on also
NOTE CONF
defines put string.
So that's the program.
NOTE CONF
And now if I do.
GHC confused Right now.
NOTE CONF
If I say Maine did I it did it look
right here.
NOTE CONF
Didn't even print the new line.
Just did the two things it said to do.
NOTE CONF
Printed a question mark and an exclamation mark.
And that's it.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And we can also just.
NOTE CONF
You say run GHC, it finds Maine and does whatever
it says.
NOTE CONF
So there it does.
It prints question mark, exclamation mark.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Any questions about that?
NOTE CONF
So now you understand why I was telling you about
the pineal gland.
NOTE CONF
Maine is the pineal gland of Haskell.
Everything goes through there.
NOTE CONF
If you want a program that does anything, it has
to work via Maine.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So main is the link from Haskell's mind to Haskell's
NOTE CONF
body.
It is the analogue of the pineal gland.
NOTE CONF
Of course, that was very messy because we didn't really,
you know, generally you want a new line after the
NOTE CONF
string.
So it's another command put string line which is just
NOTE CONF
like put string followed by printing a new line.
And if we did there's another program here called Confused
NOTE CONF
Line.
Oh.
NOTE CONF
Oh what.
It's right there.
NOTE CONF
Oh I see, I have to put the dot hs
um, right.
NOTE CONF
So that's just the same.
But put string line.
NOTE CONF
And so now if I do.
It actually prints it out neatly without this, um, prompt
NOTE CONF
immediately afterwards.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Any questions about that?
So it might seem like this is too restricted, right?
NOTE CONF
There's only one place where we can do things, but
we will see that we can build up very large
NOTE CONF
commands, even interactive commands.
And so, in fact, anything that we want to do,
NOTE CONF
anything that seems reasonable, we will be able to program.
Yes.
NOTE CONF
Another question.
What's the difference between confused and confused?
NOTE CONF
Uh, one prints a new line afterwards.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So here it was.
Um, not put string, but put string ln which it
NOTE CONF
means put a string with a new line.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So.
One thing that we've learned throughout the course, right, is
NOTE CONF
Equation's reasoning, right?
Haskell programs are basically equations, and it's always safe to
NOTE CONF
replace the left hand side of an equation by the
right hand side.
NOTE CONF
Um.
So right in Haskell you can write one plus two
NOTE CONF
times one plus two.
Or you could write let x equal one plus two
NOTE CONF
in x times x.
And those both mean the same thing.
NOTE CONF
Right.
We can just take every occurrence of x and replace
NOTE CONF
it by one plus two.
And this would reduce to that.
NOTE CONF
And this reduces to nine.
Now who's ever learned a programming language other than Haskell.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And was that one a functional language or object oriented
NOTE CONF
or imperative.
Let's see how many people learned another functional language.
NOTE CONF
Ooh.
Which one?
NOTE CONF
You with your hand up in the back.
Which language you do learn?
NOTE CONF
I don't want to answer.
You don't want to answer?
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um.
NOTE CONF
And who learned an object oriented language?
Right.
NOTE CONF
Quite a few of you.
So in an object oriented language.
NOTE CONF
Right.
You can just give a command and it will do
NOTE CONF
it.
So if you say print ha, print ha, it will
NOTE CONF
print.
Ha ha.
NOTE CONF
On the other hand, in a language like that with
side effects, if you say let x equal print ha
NOTE CONF
in x followed by x, what's going to do is
it's going to execute this to figure out what value
NOTE CONF
to assign to x.
And when it executes this, it will print ha.
NOTE CONF
And then it'll bind x to some value, maybe it's
unit, and then it will just return unit and return
NOTE CONF
unit again.
So it just prints.
NOTE CONF
Ha.
It doesn't print.
NOTE CONF
Ha ha.
So you'd think you were optimising your program by doing
NOTE CONF
this.
But in fact when you do it, the laugh is
NOTE CONF
on you.
On the other hand, you could turned it into a
NOTE CONF
function like say let f of unit be print.
Ha!
NOTE CONF
And now, right, it's waiting for the argument before it
does anything.
NOTE CONF
And so now if you say f of unit followed
by f of unit, it will go ha ha again.
NOTE CONF
So you need to learn this trick of always delaying
any actions to the exact point where you want them.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And people have learned that trick.
NOTE CONF
Some of you, the ones using languages with side effects.
Yes.
NOTE CONF
No.
Maybe not familiar.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
What are languages with side effects?
NOTE CONF
Pretty much every language in the world other than Haskell.
So write in Haskell, right?
NOTE CONF
Obviously, you can do exceptional reasoning like this, but we
can also do that just as well with commands.
NOTE CONF
So if I say put string ha followed by put
string ha or I've got the term let em be
NOTE CONF
put string ha in em, followed by em.
These are both entirely equivalent.
NOTE CONF
So you don't have this problem that you need to
worry about where the side effects occur.
NOTE CONF
We only have values that behave just like any other
value, and there's only one point at which you can
NOTE CONF
turn that value into an action which is main the
pineal gland.
NOTE CONF
So other than that, it's just a value.
And it's a value that denotes a command that if
NOTE CONF
it is ever performed, will do this thing.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Is that subtle little distinction clear to people now anybody
want to ask a question about that.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So the next question you might have is well all
NOTE CONF
right that's fine.
But what if I actually want to do something interactive.
NOTE CONF
So now I'm getting inputs.
The AI part of IO and I'm printing outputs.
NOTE CONF
So so far we've just learned how to do output.
What about mixing inputs and outputs.
NOTE CONF
So now I'm going to have a command that says
read a character that's going to be called get char
NOTE CONF
and that's going to return a character.
So now instead of just having things that do stuff.
NOTE CONF
We have things that do stuff and return a value.
So I o of unit is the type of commands
NOTE CONF
that yield no value.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Because unit is the trivial type that contains just one
value, which we also write as an open and closed
NOTE CONF
parenthesis.
So now we're going to write io char for you
NOTE CONF
guys.
Pronounce it char or care.
NOTE CONF
I never know.
We'll take a vote.
NOTE CONF
How many people say char.
How many people say care.
NOTE CONF
Oh good I had the majority.
All right char, um, so here's the command to read
NOTE CONF
a character.
Get char whose type is I o of char.
NOTE CONF
So if, let's say the input say I've typed at
the terminal a, b, c and I execute get char
NOTE CONF
that's going to return the value a, and now it's
no longer as if I've typed a, b, c, it's
NOTE CONF
read the a.
So now the remaining input is just b and C
NOTE CONF
because the A has been read.
And so if I do get char again the next
NOTE CONF
thing I'll get will be b.
So in general we can write IOA for a command
NOTE CONF
that returns a value of type A.
And there's one very important command return which takes an
NOTE CONF
A and returns an I o of a.
And so this is the command that does nothing but
NOTE CONF
returns the given value.
So for instance return empty list.
NOTE CONF
Um has type I o of string um and it
returns the empty string.
NOTE CONF
Um, and if the input was bcc right, it would
return the value empty and the input is not changed.
NOTE CONF
Right.
It does nothing.
NOTE CONF
So the input is still BCC.
And we can combine commands with values.
NOTE CONF
So we've got this.
Operator.
NOTE CONF
Um, so the other one greater than greater than sometimes
pronounced seek for sequence, do one thing and then another
NOTE CONF
thing.
Um, this one is greater than greater than equal.
NOTE CONF
And it's pronounced bind.
So greater than greater than equal takes.
NOTE CONF
This is a weird type.
It takes an I o of a and a function
NOTE CONF
from a to I o of b, and it returns
an I o of b.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So you have you have to wake up now because
NOTE CONF
I just said something weird, right.
This ah people does this.
NOTE CONF
Look you're all used to functions as arguments okay.
But this should look at least a little bit weird.
NOTE CONF
So what does this do?
Um, so if I say get char bind lambda x
NOTE CONF
goes to put char of two upper of x.
Then when the input is a b c get char
NOTE CONF
returns an a, it binds it to x.
So in other words you take this function and you
NOTE CONF
return it to whatever value was returned by this.
So x will get bound to the a returned by
NOTE CONF
this.
And now I compute two upper of x.
NOTE CONF
So that will be an uppercase A.
And I write that out to the screen.
NOTE CONF
I'm doing something interactive.
I type in a character and it echoes it in
NOTE CONF
uppercase.
And that's why this operator is called bind, because you
NOTE CONF
get a you do stuff and you get a value,
and you bind this function to the value you got,
NOTE CONF
and then you do some more stuff.
And then what stuff does the whole thing do?
NOTE CONF
It does Whatever this did and whatever this did, once
you gave it to the value returned by this one.
NOTE CONF
So we must do this one first to get the
value out, and then we do this one.
NOTE CONF
So to do this and then do that, that's what
bind is.
NOTE CONF
So it's just sequencing of operations.
And it seems a bit weird.
NOTE CONF
But if you think about for a bit you realise
this must, you know, this is the way you would
NOTE CONF
do two operations, right?
Because you do the first operation and then we'll do
NOTE CONF
the second operation.
Now this one seems to have thrown away this a
NOTE CONF
right.
Um, it's only returning whatever the second one does.
NOTE CONF
But I can have this return, whatever I want.
So maybe this B has an A in it.
NOTE CONF
So we'll see an example of that in just a
moment.
NOTE CONF
So in fact the output of this one can appear
in the output here.
NOTE CONF
It depends on what this function does.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So let's just go over that in a little bit
more detail.
NOTE CONF
So bind again takes an I o of a and
a to I o of being returns an iob.
NOTE CONF
So let m be the first argument and k be
the second argument.
NOTE CONF
It's called k by the way, because it's short for
continuation.
NOTE CONF
A continuation is just, um, a name in programming theory
for whatever you do after the first thing.
NOTE CONF
And that takes whatever the value of the first thing
was as an argument.
NOTE CONF
So the continuation says, okay, I've computed this much.
You do the next bit.
NOTE CONF
So m bind k we'll have type I o of
b right.
NOTE CONF
And if it has ever before performed it behaves as
follows.
NOTE CONF
It first performs command m which will yield a value
x of type A and then perform the command k
NOTE CONF
of x, yielding a value y of type B, right.
So k has type a to I o b, x
NOTE CONF
has type a, so k of x has type iob.
So it returns a value y of type b.
NOTE CONF
And then finally we will yield the value y.
So we're going to do this thing followed by this
NOTE CONF
thing.
So we combine two different things.
NOTE CONF
So it's very similar to the um sequence operator.
But now it's sequencing where we're threading a value through.
NOTE CONF
And this is probably the most complicated design pattern that
you will bump into in Haskell.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So it's not that complicated, but it should be just
NOTE CONF
complicated enough that you wake up and go, wait, what
is that?
NOTE CONF
So if I have, I explained it clearly enough or
are there some questions about that?
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So.
NOTE CONF
So so I wouldn't um.
So a function would be this.
NOTE CONF
Right.
And a function takes an argument and produces a result.
NOTE CONF
Um, in this case we've got commands which might either
take input or produce output.
NOTE CONF
Right.
It can do anything.
NOTE CONF
It can read a character, can write a character, it
can read and then write a character.
NOTE CONF
It can do anything.
And this one similarly.
NOTE CONF
But when it does stuff, one of the things that
we'll do is just it says, oh, and I'm returning
NOTE CONF
this value.
It's not clear enough now.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Good question.
NOTE CONF
Anybody else with a question?
Okay, so now we can do something interactive.
NOTE CONF
So get line is going to return a string.
And what is going to do is get a character
NOTE CONF
bind it to x.
If x is new line then it stopped.
NOTE CONF
So we're going to just read one line.
So as soon as we read a new line we
NOTE CONF
stop.
Um, otherwise we're going to recursively call that line, bind
NOTE CONF
that to XS and then return ex cons axes.
So here is an example.
NOTE CONF
In um this bind right.
We bind x to the first thing and then we
NOTE CONF
do another bind.
We bind x is the next thing.
NOTE CONF
And then we do a return right which does nothing.
But it returns these two things combined.
NOTE CONF
So we can put these parts together to say okay,
first read a character.
NOTE CONF
Um, Stop.
If it's a new line and otherwise, read the rest
NOTE CONF
of the line.
So get line is recursively defined in terms of that
NOTE CONF
line.
So now if the input was ABC new line def
NOTE CONF
right.
This will return the string ABC and it will have
NOTE CONF
read the new line.
So the remaining input is def clear enough.
NOTE CONF
And notice that right return and bind.
Just generalise done and sequence.
NOTE CONF
So done is just return a the value of the
unit type and sequence.
NOTE CONF
Right.
We've got two things that just return values of the
NOTE CONF
unit type.
So we return a value of the unit type.
NOTE CONF
And so we do m that will return a value
of the unit type.
NOTE CONF
So we can bind the argument of this lambda to
the value of the unit type.
NOTE CONF
And then go off and do n which will return
value of the unit type.
NOTE CONF
Yes.
The unit type is just the type written open parenthesis.
NOTE CONF
Close parentheses.
It has as one value the empty tuple.
NOTE CONF
Open parenthesis.
Close parentheses.
NOTE CONF
I'm sorry.
Just speak up a bit.
NOTE CONF
If you ask what the type of that is, it's
written the same way.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Good question.
NOTE CONF
Anything else?
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So now now that we've got get line.
And now that we've got put string line, we can
NOTE CONF
do a little interactive program which I'll call echo So
echo says read a line behind that to line if
NOTE CONF
the line is the empty string.
So if we have a line with nothing in it,
NOTE CONF
we stop.
Um, otherwise do put string line of map of two
NOTE CONF
up of line and then do echo again.
So this is very similar pattern to what we just
NOTE CONF
saw with um uh, get line itself.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So that would keep reading characters until you see a
new line.
NOTE CONF
This is keep reading lines until you see an empty
line.
NOTE CONF
Clear enough.
So let's try this one.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So main is bound to all that.
NOTE CONF
Hmm.
Aha!
NOTE CONF
Oh, should I make this larger?
Would that make it easier to read?
NOTE CONF
Okay, so I've typed in this as a test and
it's echoed it in uppercase.
NOTE CONF
Uh oh.
I can't do back spaces.
NOTE CONF
All right.
And now, if I type in, just return here.
NOTE CONF
What's going to happen?
It will stop.
NOTE CONF
And it did.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And just to prove that's really interactive.
Somebody tell me what to type.
NOTE CONF
Rice are delicious.
Sorry.
NOTE CONF
French fries are delicious.
Huh?
NOTE CONF
Uh oh, I misspelled it.
Well, that's no good.
NOTE CONF
Oh, no, I can't type.
Ah.
NOTE CONF
Last time.
I will give up if I can't do it right
NOTE CONF
this time.
Yay!
NOTE CONF
Ha ha ha!
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Very good.
So there you see something very similar running.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So now we've got a convenient abbreviation for this called
NOTE CONF
do notation.
So before I wrote bind and then x and so
NOTE CONF
on.
The way our mind works right.
NOTE CONF
It's much easier to read things the way we do
it in.
NOTE CONF
Let's first you give the short name for the thing,
and then you give the long expression that evaluates to
NOTE CONF
the thing.
So here we've got longer value expression that evaluates to
NOTE CONF
the thing and then short name for the thing.
So a better way to do this, just as a
NOTE CONF
matter of engineering, is to say X gets bound to
get char.
NOTE CONF
And then as before, if X is new line then
return empty.
NOTE CONF
Otherwise, recursively we have a do with two things in
it.
NOTE CONF
Bind x to get line and then return x context.
So this is just another way of saying this.
NOTE CONF
And this is called do notation okay.
Now very important.
NOTE CONF
So do notation is built into Haskell.
So this is um.
NOTE CONF
This is great.
Uh.
NOTE CONF
Right.
This is very convenient notation to use.
NOTE CONF
But it's defined in terms of this which is just
using lambda binding.
NOTE CONF
So here's the important thing.
So um.
NOTE CONF
Back in 1987, we'd started the Haskell Committee, and I
was a young lecturer at Glasgow University on the other
NOTE CONF
side of the country.
Uh, Eugenio Maggi was a PhD student here, and he
NOTE CONF
had come up with this idea of using monads as
a way.
NOTE CONF
Monad is the name for this thing, by the way.
Um, something with a return and a bind is called
NOTE CONF
a monad.
Um, he had come up with.
NOTE CONF
He'd come up with, uh, monads as a way of
structuring the semantics of programming languages.
NOTE CONF
And so I came over and talked with him, and
he sort of explained to me what was going on.
NOTE CONF
Um, and then I went back and I said, oh,
this would be a good way of structuring Haskell programs.
NOTE CONF
And the point was, right.
We had a preliminary Haskell implementation.
NOTE CONF
Then I didn't need to wait for Will Partain, who
was in charge of the Haskell implementation, to implement do.
NOTE CONF
I could just define something with an operator I did
not use.
NOTE CONF
Greater than greater than equal.
I don't remember what I used.
NOTE CONF
Greater than greater than equal was proposed by Andy Gordon,
who also happens to be a graduate of the University
NOTE CONF
of Edinburgh.
Um, and he was an undergraduate here.
NOTE CONF
He was a graduate student at Cambridge, which he was
where he was at the time when he proposed using
NOTE CONF
this symbol.
Uh, right.
NOTE CONF
But you can define any operator you want in Haskell.
And the point is, if you need something that does
NOTE CONF
some binding, you can use lambdas to do it.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So I'm teaching you about this neat programming language feature
that I implemented.
NOTE CONF
But the key point is you can do the same.
Right.
NOTE CONF
If you need something that binds new stuff.
You can use lambdas to do it.
NOTE CONF
So Haskell is sort of a programming language that lets
you define your own programming language within Haskell.
NOTE CONF
So monads have now been used so much that they're
kind of built in.
NOTE CONF
And we've got this convenient do notation.
But the point is all the important stuff is up
NOTE CONF
here.
And you can do that yourself.
NOTE CONF
So if you want to invent your own, um, language
features, you can do it.
NOTE CONF
And that's one of the things that makes Haskell so
powerful.
NOTE CONF
And then here's echo rewritten and do notation.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So you just say do and a curly brace and
then variable name arrow.
NOTE CONF
And then something of a type uh I o of
blah.
NOTE CONF
And again do curly braces, something of type I o
of blah.
NOTE CONF
And this is very important because the most popular language
at the time with C and in C you use
NOTE CONF
curly braces and semicolons for commands.
So this made Haskell look a little bit like C.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So the general meaning is that whenever you write x
NOTE CONF
drawn from E semicolon and then some stuff that becomes
e bind lambda x arrow and then the same stuff,
NOTE CONF
if you just write e that becomes E um sequence
and then some stuff and notice that E sequence.
NOTE CONF
And then some stuff could also be written as um
e bind backslash uh unit and then some stuff.
NOTE CONF
So right.
If we had do x one from e1, x2 from
NOTE CONF
E to E3 and so on, that becomes e1, bind
x1, e2, bind to x2, and so on.
NOTE CONF
So do is just an abbreviation for stuff we've already
got.
NOTE CONF
So I've been using this word monad.
Um, the word monad comes from category theory.
NOTE CONF
That's what inspired, um, Eugenio Homology when he first did
his semantics.
NOTE CONF
There's this construct that had been sitting around in category
theory since the 1950s called a monad.
NOTE CONF
Um, and it was actually all this that convinced me
it was worth learning.
NOTE CONF
Category theory and category theory since then has inspired other
useful ideas for programming languages.
NOTE CONF
So, um, I'll just write N, followed by x gets
V to stand for term n with the variable x
NOTE CONF
replaced by the value v.
So if I've got x times x with x replaced
NOTE CONF
by three, that becomes three times three.
And I think you've all learned the beta law by
NOTE CONF
now, which is that lambda x n applied to v
becomes n with x gets v.
NOTE CONF
So for instance lambda x x times x applied to
three is the same as x times x with x
NOTE CONF
replaced by three, which is the same as three times
three.
NOTE CONF
That should be familiar to you.
And how many people have bumped into the name monoid?
NOTE CONF
Monoid is standard in algebra, so a few of you
have bumped into it before, but it's a very standard
NOTE CONF
term in algebra.
It's how many people run into the term group in
NOTE CONF
algebra, right?
A few more of you.
NOTE CONF
So a monoid is like a group, but it has
a bit less structure.
NOTE CONF
A group has an operator, a unit and an inverse,
and a monoid just has an operator and a unit.
NOTE CONF
No inverse.
So it just says, you've got an operator, which I'll
NOTE CONF
write here is O plus and it value you.
And you must be the unit for O plus.
NOTE CONF
And O plus must be associative.
So you um O plus x is x x, o
NOTE CONF
plus u is x and x plus y plus z
is the same as x plus y plus z parentheses
NOTE CONF
each way.
Right.
NOTE CONF
And we bump into monoids all the time.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Monoids are pretty much what we use in a fold.
Um, so plus and zero times and one or in
NOTE CONF
false and in true, um, concatenate and the empty list.
And we've already seen write sequence and done these are
NOTE CONF
all examples of monoids.
So as we saw right a monad is almost the
NOTE CONF
same.
Um, sorry we haven't seen that yet.
NOTE CONF
Right.
We saw this with sequencing.
NOTE CONF
So a monads almost the same.
So the thing that becomes done that becomes return V,
NOTE CONF
so we return V followed by lambda xm becomes um
lambda xm applied to v or m with x replaced
NOTE CONF
by v, and then m followed by lambda x return
x where we can even just say m bind return
NOTE CONF
is the same as m, right?
So what does this say?
NOTE CONF
It says do m get the value it returns, bind
that to x and then do nothing else and return
NOTE CONF
that value.
So obviously that's the same as just doing m.
NOTE CONF
And finally here are two different things where only the
parentheses change and they mean the same thing.
NOTE CONF
So it says do m bind the result to x,
do n bind the result to y, and then do
NOTE CONF
oh.
And this is do m bind the result to x,
NOTE CONF
do n bind the result to y and then do
oh.
NOTE CONF
So it just says both ways of grouping it have
the same effect.
NOTE CONF
They do what M does, they bind the result to
X, they do what n does, they bind the result
NOTE CONF
to y, and then they do.
Oh.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So it doesn't matter where you put the parentheses.
NOTE CONF
And that is a monad.
So I have a, a colleague that says, you know,
NOTE CONF
there's only one thing we did wrong with monads.
We shouldn't have called the monads.
NOTE CONF
This is Simon Peyton Jones.
It's time.
NOTE CONF
Peyton Jones is the main editor of the Haskell Report.
He's still the main maintainer of GHC of the version
NOTE CONF
of Haskell that you use.
It's called GHC because he and John Hughes and I
NOTE CONF
were all professors at Glasgow University at the time that
this was done, so it's still the GHC Glasgow Haskell
NOTE CONF
Compiler.
Sometimes people say Glorious Haskell compiler, but it's really Glasgow.
NOTE CONF
I hate to say that to people in Edinburgh, but
it's really Glasgow.
NOTE CONF
So anyhow, Simon says, you know, there's only one thing
wrong with monads.
NOTE CONF
It's a very simple idea.
You just have two operators.
NOTE CONF
They satisfy these three simple laws, but we shouldn't have
called it monad.
NOTE CONF
Everybody gets scared by monad.
We should have called it warm fuzzy thing.
NOTE CONF
So I will stop there and can tell you more
about monads tomorrow.
NOTE CONF
Thank you very much.
You got clap every time.
NOTE CONF
Sorry.
You got a clap every time.
NOTE CONF
You're doing something right.
Life.
NOTE CONF
There are memories that will never leave us.
Oh, come on, come on, come on, come on.
NOTE CONF
I'll make you feel like you on my own.
And make.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
I do not give you everything that a woman possibly
NOTE CONF
can.
Honey, you know I did.
NOTE CONF
And each time I tell myself that I don't think
I've had enough.
NOTE CONF
Come on.
I want to show you, baby, that a woman can
NOTE CONF
be tough.